Started 10 November 2021
Notes on Zohner et al. 2017 ('Spring predictability ...')

<><><><><><><>
By Lizzie from re-reading this (for the first time in a long time) on 8 November 2021

Big points: they use MONTHLY climate data, 'ordinal' chilling requirements (1, 2, 3) and complicated stats, often by GRIDCELL. And, they don't address within-species variability, but we do! Go us.

Here are my in-order notes:

'Intuitively...' -- why can't I use that to explain hypotheses that I have?

Hypotheses: "Our expectation was that species from regions with a less predictable onset of spring condi- tions, would have ‘safer’ leaf-out strategies, meaning that they would require longer chilling periods and higher spring warm- ing to leaf-out than species from regions with more predictable frost-free spring conditions."

Chilling is BINNED data -- it's C1, C2, C3 (or 1, 2, 3 later) with three being a HIGH chilling requirement. 

STV is "STV was calculated as the standard deviation (SD) of mean minimum temperatures of the March–May period over the past 100 years (1901–2013)."

STV is based on *monthly* data. [In contrast, we have daily climate data.]

They excluded species that show up on more than one continent (e.g., Betula nana). 

Stats in this paper are way more complicated than I remembered! They did a bunch of random forests (pg 454, under 'Correlations...' on the left). I also don't really understand how you can test continental differences when species are confounded with continent. They keep citing other papers by non-stats experts with some sort of hierarchical bayesian approach they use (see last full paragraph on pg 454). I also don't fully know what recursive partitioning is (pg 456, under the heading 'the link between...').

They do grid cell analysis! I never really got this, but I think it is in plots Fig 1c (and 1d) and so each point is a grid cell and then they treat each species a 1, 2, 3 for chilling requirement (higher number means higher chilling requirement) so higher values on the Y are HIGHER chill (so they get the opposite result to our current results). 

Western vs Eastern North America, "Indeed, when grown together, the leaf-out dates of western NA species preceded those of eastern NA species by an average of 12 days (Figure S14a and Table S5)."

I personally think that botanical garden species grown from seed do undergo selection in the nursery (so I disagree with their point on pg. 458, near the very end of the pg). 

"We did not address within-species phenological variability and therefore cannot draw conclusions about population- level adaptations to temperature variability, a topic to be explored in the future."
